
Effects
=============================

We can make our sounds much more interesting with effects!
Effect transforms the sound of the instrument in some way. 
There are several groups of effects. Some of them affect only amplitude,
while the other alter frequency or phase or place sound in acoustic 
environment.

To apply effect to the sound we have to modify our runner function. 
Right now all arguments control the sound that is produced with the 
single note. But we want to alter the total sound that goes out of 
the instrument. It includes the mixed sound from all notes that are played.
Let's modify our definition for function `run`:

~~~haskell
let run eff k f = vdac $ (eff =<< ) $ midi $ onMsg (mul k . f . (/ 2))
~~~	

The first argument now applies some effect to the output signal.

## Time/Based

### Reverb

Reverb places the sound in some room, cave or hall.
We can apply reverb with function `reverTime`:

~~~haskell
reverTime :: Sig -> Sig -> Sig
~~~

It expects the reverb time (in seconds) as a first argument and the signal as
the second argument.

~~~haskell
run (return . reverTime 1.5) (0.05 * env) (\x -> lp (x + 500 * env) (7 + 3 * sqr 4) $ saw x)
~~~

There is also a function `rever1`:

~~~haskell
rever1 :: Sig -> Sig -> (Sig, Sig)
~~~

It's base on very cool Csound unit `reverbsc`. It takes in feedback level (0 to 1)
and input signal and produces the processed output. There are several ready to use
shortcuts: `smallRoom`, `smallHall`, `lhaskellargeRoom`, `largHall` and `magicCave`.

Let's place our sound in the magic cave:

~~~haskell
run (return . magicCave) (0.05 * env) (\x -> lp (x + 500 * env) (7 + 3 * sqr 4) $ saw x)
~~~

You can hear how dramatically an effect can change the sound.

## Delay

Delay adds some echoes to the sound. the simplest function is `echo`:

~~~haskell
echo :: D -> Sig -> Sig -> SE Sig
echo dt fb asig
~~~

It takes the delay time, the ratio of signal attenuation (reflections will be weaker by this amount)
and the input signal. Notice that the output is wrapped in the `SE`-monad. `SE` means side effect.
It describes some nasty impure things. This function allocates the buffer of memory to hold
the delayed signal. So thats why the output contains side-effects.

Let's try it out:

~~~haskell
run (echo  0.5 0.4) (0.05 * env) (\x -> lp (x + 500 * env) (7 + 3 * sqr 4) $ saw x)
~~~

Let's add some reverberation:

~~~haskell
run (fmap smallHall . echo  0.5 0.4) (0.05 * env) (\x -> lp (x + 500 * env) (7 + 3 * sqr 4) $ saw x)
~~~

We are using the `fmap` function to apply the next effect in chain to the value with side-effects.
The `SE`-wrapper type is `Monad` and hence it's `Applicative` and `Functor`.
The `echo` function is a specification of generic function:

~~~haskell
fdelay :: D -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig -> SE Sig
fdelay len fbk mix asig
~~~

It takes a delay time, ratio of sound attenuation, the mix level (we add the initial sound 
with processed one which is scaled by amount of `mix`) and the input signal.

There is the last most generic function `fvdelay`. With it we can vary the delay time: 

~~~haskell
fvdelay :: D -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig -> SE Sig
fvdelay maxDelTime delTime fbk mix asig
~~~

It takes the maximum delay time and the delay time which is signal (it must be bounded by `maxDelTime`). 
Other arguments are the same.

Multitap delays can be achieved with function

~~~haskell
fvdelays :: D -> [(Sig, Sig)] -> Sig -> Sig -> SE Sig
fvdelays maxDelTime delTimeAndFbk  mix asig
~~~

The list holds tuples of delay times and attenuation ratio for each delay line.

## Distortion

A distortion can make our sound scream. We can use the function 

~~~haskell
distortion :: Sig -> Sig -> Sig
distortion gain asig
~~~ 

It takes a distortion level as first parameter. It ranges from 1 to infinity.
The bigger it is the harsher the sound.

## Pitch/Frequency

Let's review briefly some other cool effects.

### Chorus

Chorus makes sound more natural by adding slightly transformed versions of the original sound:

~~~haskell
chorus :: Sig -> Sig -> Sig -> SE Sig
chorus rate depth asig
~~~

Beside the input signal chorus takes two arguments that range from 0 to 1.
They represent the chorus rate and depth.

### Flanger

The next two effects are useful for creating synthetic sounds or
adding electronic flavor to the natural sounds.

The flanger can be applied with function `flange`:

~~~haskell
flange :: Lfo -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig
flange lfo fbk mx asig
~~~

Where arguments are: an LFO signal, feedback level, balance level between 
pure and processed signals and an input signal. 

Let's apply a flanger:

~~~haskell
run (return . flange (lfo tri 0.9 0.05) 0.9 0.5) (0.05 * env) (\x -> lp (x + 500 * env) (7 + 3 * sqr 4) $ saw x)
~~~

### Phaser

The phaser is a special case of flanger effect. It processes the signal with series
of all-pass filters. We can simulate a sweeping phase effect with phaser. 

There are three types of phasers. The simplest one is

~~~haskell
phase1 :: Sig -> Lfo -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig
phase1 ord lfo fbk mx asig
~~~

The arguments are: the order of phaser (an integer value, 
it represents the number of all-pass filters in chain, 4 to 2000, the better is 8,
the bigger the number the slower is algorithm), an LFO for 
phase sweeps (depth is in range acoustic waves, something around 5000 is good start, 
the rate is something between 0 and 20 Hz), amount of feedback, the balance between
pure and processed signals, the input signal.

There are two more phasers:

~~~haskell
harmPhase, powerPhase :: Sig -> Lfo -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig -> Sig
harmPhase ord lfo q sep fbk mx asig = ...
~~~

The arguments are: order of phaser, LFO-signal for frequency sweep, resonance of the filters (0 to 1),
separation of the peaks, feedback level (0 to 1), balance level.

## Diving deeper

Csound contains thousands of audio algorithms. It's impossible
to cover them all in depth in the short guide. But we can explore
them. They reside in the separate package `csound-expression-opcodes` 
that is re-exported by the module `Csound.Base`. Take a look in the docs.
there are links to the originall Csound docs. Maybe you can find your
own unique sound somewhere in this wonderful forest of algorithms.

The modules `Csound.Typed.Opcode.SignalGenerators`, `Csound.Typed.Opcode.SignalModifiers` 
and `Csound.Typed.Opcode.SpectralProcessing` are good place to start the journey.


